     At other moments, each day, he sacrificed his privacy to the good of the state: rising and going to bed, at meals and at stool, he occupied center stage. He chose what noble fingers should hand him his shirt or who should sit opposite him across the table or perform some other rite. These privileged beings shone in rotation as did the select crew allowed to stand near the chamber door and feast their eyes on the daily spectacle. But none in the audience ever saw him without his wig: Louis had lumps—sebaceous cysts—on his scalp.

     The words just used—audience, show, spectacle, pageant—suggest the resuming word façade. It is the means of ruling by keeping the mind entranced through the eye. Façade imparts grandeur, brilliance, power. It is the contrary of another artifice of government, the calculated mystery of dictatorships. The western world today wants the opposite of both façade and mystery, destroying them as soon as suspicion of either arises. We speak of the importance of “image,” and the kind desired is one of anti-façade. It must dispel, not create, the aura of grandeur and power and even of dignity. Heads of state insist on being Tony or Jimmy; they grow in popularity when they are inarticulate. The plain man with the boyish, rather helpless look is the figure congenial to a democratic society.

      It might be thought that there was a likeness between the sun king’s self-display in the bedroom and the photographs of our leaders jogging or the diagram of their organs after surgery. But Louis’s exhibitionism fostered no intimacy; it was solemn and stylized; it implied that majesty permeated the least action, making it different from its analogue in you and me. The fact is that far from these antics making him (in our favorite phrase) “more human,” they set him apart from the rest of mankind. The king has two bodies and the one on show was at all times the royal being.

      The proof is that from his accession to his death, Louis terrified all who came near him. No source of pride or strength—great estates or wealth, fame as a soldier or genius as an artist—helped anybody to withstand his glance; all were reduced to humility. Physically, Louis was well designed for his role; he was of medium height and sturdy build. His features were regular, the mouth firm and eyebrows strongly marked over a wide-open glance. And as we see in the standard full-length portrait by Rigaud, which obviously makes a point of it, Louis had an athlete’s legs. Nor did Louis achieve this mastery by an form of thunder—he was said to have lost his temper only twice. He dominated by his stance and his gaze, his self-control and his vigilance about the minutest infraction of what he regarded as his due. This peculiar power is well illustrated by a remark on record: “I was almost kept waiting.” It was part of his grand strategy to mention with a shudder his escape from that catastrophe.

     Plentiful as were the king’s expensive entertainments, they did not fill every moment of the day or night. The hours left over were occupied by two other pastimes—gambling and lovemaking.

     Gambling propels itself, an excellent time filler and a mode of excitement without strain on the muscles. The Versaillese used cards and dice (especially in trice-trac=backgammon), unaware of its cultural by product: Pascal, who enjoyed it in his worldly period, was led by it to work on probability theory and then to his theological “wager”.

     It is a fact of nature that people who are well-fed and idle in the sense of free from steady work feel a restlessness that inevitably turns amorous. That is why for chastity monks and nuns give themselves a full schedule of “works.” But love at court would also grow tedious if it were merely what people who labor tend to make it—finding sexual opportunities and satisfactions. The courtier, make and female, dresses up everything, from their bodies to their ways of speech, and sexuality is no exception; for them loving making is a ritual with tactical moves, progressive phases, fulfillment, and retreat. This explains why one of La Rochefoucauld’s maxims asserts that nobody would fall in love if one hadn’t heard about. Obviously, the sexual impulse as such needs no previous notice to make its demands; its plain urge marks its distinction from love, which means whatever a period may fancy to embellish lust.

     This is not to say that the men women at Versailles were all ingenious and delicate amorists who made the affair a work of art. Still, many differed radically from those who today haunt bars for “singles” on prowl. Married or unmarried, the courtiers’s opportunities were at hand and in readiness, a perpetual stimulus to the verbal imagination as well as the physical, everybody picturesquely poised in a kind of sensual Eden. Marriage did not hinder, because it was almost always an alliance of material interests and nothing more. But discretion and tact must be used in violating the formal vows, and again in disengaging from a liaison. Some liaisons moreover were lifelong attachments and praised by all, every move in the pairings being commonly known and the details handed down to posterity in letters and memoirs.

