	At other moments, each day, he sacrificed his privacy to the good of the state: rising and going to bed, at meals and at stool, he occupied center stage. He chose what noble fingers should hand him his shirt or who should sit opposite him across the table or perform some other rite. These privileged beings shone in rotation as did the select crew allowed to stand near the chamber door and feast their eyes on the daily spectacle. But none in the audience ever saw him without his wig: Louis had lumps—sebaceous cysts—on his scalp.
	他为了国家的利益也做了牺牲，每日每时都无一刻清静：起床睡觉，吃饭如厕，他都永远在舞台的中心。他选择由哪位贵族递给他衬衫，谁和他对面而坐获提供别的效劳。人选的幸运儿不时轮换，仆人们也是轮流被选在门边伺立，得以观看演出，打开眼界。不过，观众中没有一个看到过他不戴假发：路易头上有疙瘩——皮脂囊肿。


	The words just used—audience, show, spectacle, pageant—suggest the resuming word façade. It is the means of ruling by keeping the mind entranced through the eye. Façade imparts grandeur, brilliance, power. It is the contrary of another artifice of government, the calculated mystery of dictatorships. The western world today wants the opposite of both façade and mystery, destroying them as soon as suspicion of either arises. We speak of the importance of “image,” and the kind desired is one of anti-façade. It must dispel, not create, the aura of grandeur and power and even of dignity. Heads of state insist on being Tony or Jimmy; they grow in popularity when they are inarticulate. The plain man with the boyish, rather helpless look is the figure congenial to a democratic society.
	刚刚用的那些字眼：观众、演戏、演出、庆典，使人不断想到门面这个词。这种统治方法是通过人眼中所见使人着迷。门面意味着壮观、辉煌、权力。它和另一种统治手段——独裁政权故意的神秘截然相反。今天的西方世界对门面和神秘都不想要，只要出现两者之一的任何苗头立即予以消灭。人们知道“形象”的重要性。但希望建立的形象是反门面的。它必须打消而不是造成壮观和权力的光环，甚至连尊严都不可取。国家元首坚持被称为东尼获吉米，他们若不善辞令反而更受欢迎。民主社会喜欢的是其貌不扬，神情像孩子一样不知所措的人。


	It might be thought that there was a likeness between the sun king’s self-display in the bedroom and the photographs of our leaders jogging or the diagram of their organs after surgery. But Louis’s exhibitionism fostered no intimacy; it was solemn and stylized; it implied that majesty permeated the least action, making it different from its analogue in you and me. The fact is that far from these antics making him (in our favorite phrase) “more human,” they set him apart from the rest of mankind. The king has two bodies and the one on show was at all times the royal being.
	有人可能认为太阳王在寝室中的自我展览和我们的领导人跑步的照片或他们手术后的器官示意图有类似之处。但是路易的自我表现并不鼓励亲密，它是庄严的，格式化的；它表示哪怕是最微小的动作也充满着威严，和你我的行为截然不同。事实是，他这些做法不仅没有使他（用我们最爱用的话说）“更加有人性”，反而把他和其他人区分开来。君有二体，演出的总是庄严的那一体。


	The proof is that from his accession to his death, Louis terrified all who came near him. No source of pride or strength—great estates or wealth, fame as a soldier or genius as an artist—helped anybody to withstand his glance; all were reduced to humility. Physically, Louis was well designed for his role; he was of medium height and sturdy build. His features were regular, the mouth firm and eyebrows strongly marked over a wide-open glance. And as we see in the standard full-length portrait by Rigaud, which obviously makes a point of it, Louis had an athlete’s legs. Nor did Louis achieve this mastery by an form of thunder—he was said to have lost his temper only twice. He dominated by his stance and his gaze, his self-control and his vigilance about the minutest infraction of what he regarded as his due. This peculiar power is well illustrated by a remark on record: “I was almost kept waiting.” It was part of his grand strategy to mention with a shudder his escape from that catastrophe.
	有事实为证，从路易登基到驾崩，所有接近他的人都对他极为危惧。不管一个人有多大的领地和财富，不管他是多么著名的军人或天才的艺术家，什么样的自尊和实力都顶不住国王的一瞥，所有人都只剩了谦卑。路易的体格也很适合他的角色。他中等个子，身材魁梧；五官端正，嘴巴有力，眉毛浓密，目光锐利。我们在里戈所画的路易全身标准肖像中可以看到，他的腿像运动员一样强壮，画像中明显地强调了这一点。而且路易不怒而威——据说他只发过两次脾气。他靠姿势和眼神来统治，还有自我控制以及对他认为他应有的权益哪怕是最轻微的违背的防范。他说过的一句话说明了这种特殊的力量：“差点儿让我等待。”把它说得像逃脱灾难一样心有余悸，也是他大策略的一部分。


	Plentiful as were the king’s expensive entertainments, they did not fill every moment of the day or night. The hours left over were occupied by two other pastimes—gambling and lovemaking.
	尽管国王有众多的昂贵的娱乐活动，但仍占不满一天中的每一刻。余下的时间用来做两件事：赌博和做爱。


	Gambling propels itself, an excellent time filler and a mode of excitement without strain on the muscles. The Versaillese used cards and dice (especially in trice-trac=backgammon), unaware of its cultural by product: Pascal, who enjoyed it in his worldly period, was led by it to work on probability theory and then to his theological “wager”.
	赌博是理想的消磨时间的玩意，也是不必劳动肌肉即可令人兴奋的办法，自然大受欢迎。凡尔赛宫的人们用的赌具是纸牌和骰子（尤其是玩双陆=巴加门的时候），全然不知赌博产生的文化副产品：帕斯卡在做学问之余喜好此道，它引导他研究了概率论，后又提出信神的“赌注”。


	It is a fact of nature that people who are well-fed and idle in the sense of free from steady work feel a restlessness that inevitably turns amorous. That is why for chastity monks and nuns give themselves a full schedule of “works.” But love at court would also grow tedious if it were merely what people who labor tend to make it—finding sexual opportunities and satisfactions. The courtier, make and female, dresses up everything, from their bodies to their ways of speech, and sexuality is no exception; for them loving making is a ritual with tactical moves, progressive phases, fulfillment, and retreat. This explains why one of La Rochefoucauld’s maxims asserts that nobody would fall in love if one hadn’t heard about. Obviously, the sexual impulse as such needs no previous notice to make its demands; its plain urge marks its distinction from love, which means whatever a period may fancy to embellish lust.
	不愁温饱、不必劳作的人自然感到一种躁动，而这种躁动又不可避免地发泄为男女之间的情事。正因为此，修道士和修女为保持童贞，把“工作”的时间排得满满的。但宫廷里的男女偷情如果只是像普通人所做的——寻找性机会和性满足，那就会变得索然无味。男女廷臣们把从身体到言谈的一切都装扮修饰起来，性也不例外；对他们来说，做爱是一种礼仪，包括策略手法，渐进的阶段，成功和撤退。这解释了为什么拉罗什富科有一句箴言说如果没听说过爱就不会爱。显然，性冲动不必事先知道即可自然产生；那种纯粹的渴望把它同爱区分开来，爱则是一个时期为了粉饰性欲而想象出来的东西。


	This is not to say that the men women at Versailles were all ingenious and delicate amorists who made the affair a work of art. Still, many differed radically from those who today haunt bars for “singles” on prowl. Married or unmarried, the courtiers’s opportunities were at hand and in readiness, a perpetual stimulus to the verbal imagination as well as the physical, everybody picturesquely poised in a kind of sensual Eden. Marriage did not hinder, because it was almost always an alliance of material interests and nothing more. But discretion and tact must be used in violating the formal vows, and again in disengaging from a liaison. Some liaisons moreover were lifelong attachments and praised by all, every move in the pairings being commonly known and the details handed down to posterity in letters and memoirs.
	这并不是说凡尔赛的男女们都是聪敏而体贴的情人，把偷情升华成了艺术。不过，他们许多人确实与今天据守在酒吧间等待寻找对象的“单身”的人们大不相同。无论是已婚还是未婚，那些廷臣们的机会都近在眼前，唾手可得，这使得他们永远谈吐优雅，修饰得体，大家都在情欲的伊甸园里摆出优美的姿势。已婚不成为障碍，因为婚姻几乎全是纯粹物质利益的结合。但在违背正式的婚姻誓约时要低调而圆滑。同样，在结束外遇关系时也须如此。有的婚外关系甚至成为一生的联系，受到人们的交口称誉，哪些男女走到了一起，尽人皆知，其中细节还通过信件和回忆录流传给后世。

